Decision: Subscription tracking (#271)
appuio/openshift4-docs: docs/modules/ROOT/pages/explanations/decisions/subscription-tracking.adoc

= Subscription tracking

== Problem

> We need to track the yearly subscriptions bought for OpenShift 4 clusters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We need to track the yearly subscriptions bought for OpenShift clusters.
```

> Subscription count is required for a monthly report to RedHat.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The exact SKU count is required for a monthly report to Red Hat.
```

> RedHat subscriptions are based on (v)CPU count.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Red Hat OpenShift SKU subscriptions are based on cores or vCPU count (called `CORE BAND`), in our case we use vCPU count.
```

> We need to cover the difference of the yearly subscription count and the actual CPU count with monthly subscriptions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We need to track how many long-term SKU subscriptions (Yearly or 3 Years) we bought, in which timeframe they are valid (there can be multiple ranges, depending on when they where bought) and how many are assigned.
And with that information, we also need to report on the difference so buy additional monthly SKUs, should there be a difference.

A monthly usage report has to be sent to Red Hat, detailing the use of SKUs, assigned to consumers of them (our customers).
```

> Buying yearly subscriptions saves us money compared to buying monthly subscriptions.
> 
> It also adds a small amount of risk if a customer decides to cancel their clusters before the year is over.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

I'd remove these lines, they don't add value to this problem statement (business things)

=== Goals

> * Yearly subscriptions are tracked in a central place
> * Subscription count is available for an automated monthly report to RedHat
> * A suggestion for how many yearly subscriptions to buy is available to the account manager

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Long-term SKU subscriptions (Yearly or 3 Years) are tracked in a central place, including validity information
* Detailed SKU subscription count is available for an automated monthly report to Red Hat
* A suggestion for how many yearly subscriptions to buy is available to the account or partner manager
```

=== Non-goals

* Full automation of subscription buying

== Proposals

=== Option 1: Database and Web UI (custom/ Grafana)

We store subscriptions in a database and build a custom UI or Grafana dashboard to visualize the data.

This allows instant feedback and would allow account managers to track subscriptions themselves without having to ask our team.

Building the UI would take time and we would need to maintain it.

> Grafana most likely doesn't support editing data.

Reviewer: I'd rather see a clear yes/no, rather than a "most likely" in a proposal. Either it can do it, or not.

Author: Editing data is possible. But creating a dashboard that comfortably works is not that easy.

Reviewer: Got it. Are you able to describe it that way in the option?

> === Option 2: Store in ConfigMap managed by Commodore

Reviewer: I don't understand this option. It only talks about where to store data, but how can this data be accessed? Option 1 clearly states where to store and how to work with the data, this option here seems to lack more profound information about that.

Author: I added a process proposal.

We store the bought subscriptions in a ConfigMap managed by Commodore.
This gives us free versioning and a history of changes.
Coupled with a Jira ticket we can track who bought and licenses for which customer.

We don't need to build a custom UI or any other tooling.

The only visualization will be the monthly report to RedHat.

The ConfigMap can contain JSON or YAML which natively is supported by most editors.

=== Option 3: Store in Odoo

We store the bought subscriptions in Odoo.
This would allow us to track the subscriptions in the same place as the customer data and contracts.

We would not need to build a custom UI but might have to create a custom Odoo module.

Currently we're migrating Odoo versions but the timeline isn't clear yet.
There's a lot of other work to do in Odoo and we don't want to add more work to the migration.

== Decision

> We decided to go with option 2 and track the bought subscriptions in a ConfigMap managed by Commodore.

Reviewer: I might be OK with that decision, once I understand option 2 better :+1:  In the long term I plan to have that fully integrated into Odoo, so we should find a lean interim solution until then.

== Rationale

We like to start simple and first see if the effort of a custom UI is worth it.

> A account manager needs to act on the suggestion of how many subscriptions to buy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An account manager needs to act on the suggestion of how many subscriptions to buy.
```

A monthly usage report has to be sent to Red Hat, detailing the use of SKUs, assigned to consumers of them (our customers).

=== Goals

* Long-term SKU subscriptions (Yearly or 3 Years) are tracked in a central place, including validity information
* Detailed SKU subscription count is available for an automated monthly report to Red Hat
* A suggestion for how many yearly subscriptions to buy is available to the account or partner manager

=== Non-goals

* Full automation of subscription buying

== Proposals

=== Option 1: Database and Web UI (custom/ Grafana)

We store subscriptions in a database and build a custom UI or Grafana dashboard to visualize the data.

This allows instant feedback and would allow account managers to track subscriptions themselves without having to ask our team.

Building the UI would take time and we would need to maintain it.

Grafana most likely doesn't support editing data.

=== Option 2: Store in ConfigMap managed by Commodore

We store the bought subscriptions in a ConfigMap managed by Commodore.
This gives us free versioning and a history of changes.

> Coupled with a Jira ticket we can track who bought and licenses for which customer.

Reviewer: This sentence doesn't make click in my head. :thinking:

Author: fixed the typo

We don't need to build a custom UI or any other tooling.

> The only visualization will be the monthly report to RedHat.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The only visualization will be the monthly report to Red Hat.
```
